__CS 251 |__ January 08, 2019

# MIPS Language

MIPS is an architecture design that allows for splitting up the instructions you give it to maximize the operations  it can perform. It stands for _Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipeline Stages._

It follows a 32 bit (with 64 bit developed later) **Reduced Instruction Set (RISC)** architecture, which only define very basic operations. 


### Registers

Registers are small portions of data that can be accessed at fast speeds, compared to slower storage. The 32 bit version of MIPS has 32 registers, starting at register 0. Each register is 32 bits wide. 

> These values are defined as a design choice by MIPS - you can have an arbitrary number of registers with the same arbitrary width if you wanted.

Register 0 (`$0`) is always set to solely 0s to allow for functionality like setting constants, etc. In order to manipulate any values, they must first be loaded into a register.

### Instructions

**MIPS** has 3 formats of instructions:

####1. R-Format

`add $rd $rs $rt` is the MIPS version of the add command, which is an R-format instruction. The **arithmetic logic unit** in the RAM model is responsible for adding the values in the two rightmost **source registers** (`$rs` and `$rt`) and placing it into the **destination register** (`$rd`).

Logic operations like `and` and `or` are **bitwise** operations, which means that they compare the actual bits one-by-one.

> **Ex. `C` vs `MIPS` instructions**
>
> ```c
> f = (g + h) - (i + j);
> ```
>
> ```php
> add $r6, $r2, $r3
> add $r7, $r4, $r5
> sub $r1, $r6, $r7
> ```

#### 2. I-Format

Operations in this format don't bother going to a second register and looking up a value - instead, they are provided with an immediate value to be used. `addi $rd $rs immediate_val` is the immediate I-Format version of the `add` command, and you'll notice it is lacking a `$rt` value, instead replacing it with `immediate_val`.

####3. J-Format

Operations in this format tells the program to jump to a certain specified instruction line in the program. 

**Jumps**
When an operation like `j immediate_val` is executed, the **program counter** is set to $4 \times$ `immediate_val` (known as the **jump target address**) so the proper memory address is used. The immediate value is sometimes called the _offset_.

> **Ex. Jumpin' around**
>
> ```php
> Address 4: j 4
> Address 8: add $1, $2, $3
> Address 12: add $2, $5, $1
> Address 16: add $2, $5, $4
> ```
>
> This code will encounter `j 28 ` and skip over the 2^nd^ and 3^rd^ lines to jump to Address $4 * 4 = 16$, which is Line 4.

**Branches**
The `beq $s, $t, i` operation compares the contents of `$s` with `$t`. 

If they're equal, add $4 \times$`i` to the PC to 'branch', and the PC will also be incremented by 4. If they're not equal, the next instruction in the code is executed instead. 

`bne` is similar, but 'branches' when the contents are _not_ equal.

> __Ex. Conditional Branching__
>
> ```mips
> add $1, $0, $0
> addi $2, $0, 6
> addi $1, $1, 5
> addi $2, $2, -1
> bne $2, $0, -3
> add $4, $6, $8
> ```
>
> This sample code will continually add 5 to `$1` 6 times (by decrementing `$2` by 1 starting from 6 to 0) until `$2`'s value is 0, after which it will not branch and continue executing the rest of the program.



