__M239 |__ Oct 31, 2018 :ghost:

# Trees (cont.)

A __spanning tree__ $T$ of a graph $G$ is a subgraph of $G$ that is a tree where $V(T) = V(G)$. It's a subgraph that has the same vertices but possibly less edges.

==__Theorem^1^:__ If $G$ is a connected graph such that every cycle in $G$ has even length, then $G$ is bipartite.==

> The way we approach proving this is by showing if a cycle in $G$ has odd length, it's connecting two vertices in the same set in a bipartition (_i.e. if you jump back and forth between the two sets (moving between vertices), jumping an even number of times gives you two vertices in the same partition, so they are the same colour and thus the graph cannot be bipartite)._)

---

__Proof of Theorem^1^__
Let $T$ be a spanning tree of $G$, and let $(X, Y)$ be a bipartition of $T$. 

Either:

1. For every edge $e$ in $E(G) \setminus E(T)$, $e$ has one end in $X$ and one in $Y$. This means $(X, Y)$ is a bipartition of $G$ and $G$ is bipartite.
2. There is an edge $e$ in $E(G) \setminus E(T)$ where both ends of $e$ are in the same one of $X, Y$. This means the path $P$ in $T$ joining the ends of $e$ has even length. Therefore, the cycle $P + e$ has odd length. If $G$ has only even cycles, this cannot occur, so $G$ must be bipartite by elimination.

---

> In homework, we showed: if $G$ is a bipartite graph with $n$ vertices, then $|E(G)| \leq (\frac{n}{2})^2$.
> A harder version: if $G$ is a graph with no cycle of length 3, then $|E(G)| \leq (\frac{n}{2})^2$ (leads to Turan's Theorem).



# Coloring Graphs/Planar Graphs

We colour the vertices such that adjacent vertices get different colours.

__Some Facts:__ 

1. A graph can be coloured with 2 colours _iff_ it is bipartite.
2. A graph can be coloured with 1 colour _iff_ it has no edges.
3. An odd cycle needs 3 colours.
4. A complete graph with $n$ vertices ($K_n$) needs $n$ colours.

==__Theorem^2^:__ Let $G$ be a graph and let $\triangle(G)$ denote the largest degree of any vertex in $G$. Then $G$ can be coloured with $\triangle(G) + 1$ colours.==

---

__Proof of Theorem^2^__
We proceed by induction on $|V(G)|$.

_Base Case:_ $|V(G)| = 1$
In this case, $\triangle(G) = 0$ and $G$ can indeed be coloured with 1 colour.

If $|V(G)| > 1$, let $v$ be any vertex of $G$ and let $H = G - v$. Then $\triangle(H) \leq \triangle(G)$ and by induction, $H$ can be coloured with $\triangle(H) + 1$ colours.
The vertex $v$ has $\leq \triangle(G)$ neightbours in $H$, so those neighbours are coloured with at $\leq \triangle(G)$ colours.  Thus, at least 1 colour out of the $\triangle(G) + 1$ colours is available to colour $v$ a colour that is different from its neighbours. QED.

---

