1. What **type of study** is this and why?

   > Think about if the researchers changed/controlled any variates. If so, then it's very likely observational. If there's a survey mentionef in the study, a sample survey is also very likely.

   __Answer__: observational, since the researchers did not attempt to change/control any variates
   __Alternate Answer__: sample survey, since the researchers carried out a survey

2. Define the Problem for this study.

   > What are the researchers themselves trying to find out? Look for a quote or a conclusion in the article.

3. Is the type of Problem descriptive, causative, or predictive?
   Explain why.

4. What are the two most important variates in this study and
   what is their type?

   > What is being measured?

5. Define a suitable target population for this study.

   > Who are the researchers interested in studying? If nothing is explicitly stated, look at who the study consisted of and extrapolate to a larger population. Make sure you're being as specific as possible.

6. Define a suitable study population for this study.

   > Note that the __units in the study population may be systematically different to units in target population in terms of some attribute__!
   >
   > As well, the study population is always a subset of the target population (most of the time it's a strict subset).

7. Give a possible source of study error for this study in relation
   to your answers to to 5) and 6).

8. What information is given about the sampling protocol for this
   study?

   > You don't have to reshape the description with your own words; precision matters more so you can reuse the wording in the original article if it answers the question.

9. Give a possible source of sample error for this study based on
   the information you have stated in 8) and the fact that there are
   more that ten thousand students in Grades 7 to 9 in the provinces
   of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island.

10. What type of numerical summary is the number 2.7 mentioned
    in the article?