__CS 240 | __ January 15, 2019

# MIPS Syntax

##Instructions

####Load Immediate and Skip: `lis $d` 

With this instruction, we treat the next word as an _immediate value_ and load it into `$d`. The immediate value is probably not an instruction. Then, we skip to the next instruction (by incrementing `PC` by 4). 

####Branch Not Equal: `bne`

_Covered in CS 251_

####Set Less Than: `slt $d, $s, $t`

Set the value in `$d` to be a boolean value, more specifically the result of if `$s` is less than `$t`

_More instructions are available in MIPS - refer to the reference sheet given to us_



## Labels

Using hardcoded values for control instructions like `bne $s, $t, VAL` is bad practice. Changing one line of code can break your code, as the offsets would be wrong. Instead, we can use **labels** to specify a line of code.

```php
infiniteloop:
	add $1, $2, $3
    sub $2, $3, $1
    beq $0, $0, infiniteloop
```

The label `infiniteloop` can substitute for a numerical offset. It is computed by the ==assembler== to be the difference between the program counter and the address location of `infiniteloop`.

- Labels share a line number and therefore an address with the next following instruction (ignoring all whitespace), and they never have their own line number.
- Labels at the end of code are allowed, and would reference the address of the first instruction line after your program (you might possibly want to jump to the end of your program).
- _Multiple_ labels for the same line is valid code.
- Labels can be used as designators for functions, also known as **procedures** in MIPS.

