__CS 240 |__ January 28, 2019

- Updating priority of node at index $i$ in a min-heap in $O(\log n)$ time: 

  1. Replace priority at index $i$.
  2. If new priority $\gt$ previous priority, perform `fix-down`.
  3. If new priority $\lt$ previous priority, perform `fix up`.

  > Note that searching takes $\Theta(n)$ in worse case scenario

- Deleting max in a max-heap:

  1. Delete largest priority (at top)
  2. Move lowermost rightmost node to top (to preserve structural invariant)
  3. Perform `fix-down` (to maintain node order invariant)

- Inserting element into max-heap:

  1. easy, go lowermost rightmost and insert

- Given a set of $k$ sorted arrays $\{A_1, ..., A_k\}$ that combine to have $n$ elements, give an $O(n \log k)$ algorithm that produces a single sorted array containing all $n$ elements.

  1. Since the arrays are sorted, add the smallest (first) element along with the information about which array it's from to the min heap. 
  2. Perform `deleteMin` to get a smallest element `x` in all the arrays. Put that into your single sorted array result.
  3. Using the information about which array `x` came from, take the next smallest element in that array and insert it into the minheap.
  4. Repeat Steps 2 and 3.

  Since we insert each element into the minheap exactly **once**, delete each element from the minheap exactly **once**, there are $n$ elements and each insertion/deletion takes $\log k$ times, the time it takes to finish this algorithm is is $n + n \log k + n \log k$ (initialize output + insertion + deletion), which gives us a runtime of $O(n \log k)$ time.

- Perform `quickSelect` to find the element at _index 3 in the **sorted** array_ in the array $A = [8, 17, 10, 1, 6, 20, 2, 9, 7, 13]$. 

  1. Choose the last element in the array as the pivot.
  2. Keep track of two indices, a `large` index that starts at the right and a `small` index that starts at the leftmost element.
  3. Check the value at the `large` index. If it is smaller than the last element, then stop and work with the `small` index. Otherwise, continue moving across the array.
  4. Check the value at the `small` index. If it is larger than the last element, then stop and work with the `large` index. Otherwise, continue moving across the array.
  5. Once you have found both elements at `large` and `small` are in violation, swap the two elements. Continue with Steps 3 and 4.
  6. Once the `large` and `small` indices cross over, move the pivot (last) element into the index after the `small` index and check which smaller subarray you should work with again, or stop if the index you moved the pivot into is the desire index.
  7. Note that if you work with the array on the right (larger) side of the pivot, you should subtract the size of the left (smaller) array + 1 from the desired index.