__CS 240__ | February 5, 2019

# Dictionaries

A **dictionary** is a collection of **items**, each of which contains

- a **key**
- some **data**

and is called a **key-value pair (KVP)**. Keys are usually unique, and can be *compared*. 

_Review definition of a Binary Search Tree_

## AVL Trees

An **AVL tree** is a BST with an additional _height-balance_ property. It has the property that _the heights of the left subtree $L$ and right subtree $R$ differ by at most 1._

> The height of an empty tree is -1 to differentiate it from a tree with a single node.

At each non-empty node, a **balance factor** equal to height($R$) - height($L$) $\in \{-1, 0, 1\}$ means that a tree is left-heavy, balanced, and right-heavy, respectively.

- Need to store the height of the subtree of each node in the node itself
- Can also store balance factors on the nodes instead of the heights

Since the height is $\Theta(\log n)$, `search`, `insert`, `delete` all have a time efficiency of $\Theta(\log n)$ in the worst case.

> **Proof of $\Theta(\log n)$**
>
> Define $N(h)$ to be the minimum number of nodes in a height $h$ AVL tree.
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> N(h) &= 1 + N(h - 1) + N(h- 2) \text{ if } h \geq 1 \\ 
> &= 1 \text{ if } h \geq 1 \\
> &= 0 \text{ if } h = -1
> \end{align*}
> $$
> This recurrence relation is similar to the Fibonacci numbers, and working it out, we get that $N(h) = F_{n + 3} - 1$.
>
> A general formula for the $n^{th}$ Fibonacci number is:
>
> $F_n = \lceil \frac{\gamma^n}{\sqrt 5} \rfloor$ where $\gamma$ is the golden equal to $\frac{1 + \sqrt 5} 2$ and $\lceil \rfloor$ means to take the closest integer to the number. So, $n \geq N(h) =  \lceil \frac{\frac{(! + \sqrt 5)^{h + 3}}{2}}{\sqrt 5} \rfloor - 1$.
>
> If we just want a lower bound, an **alternative** is like so:
> $$
> n \geq N(h) \gt 2N(h - 2) \gt 4 N(h - 4) \gt 8N(h - 6) \gt 2^iN(h - 2i) \gt 2^{\lfloor \frac h 2 \rfloor} N(1) = 2^{\lfloor \frac h 2 \rfloor}
> $$
> So, $n \geq 2^{\lfloor \frac h 2 \rfloor}$ is a lower bound. Solving for $h$, $h \in \Omega(\log n)$.
>
> We also need an upper bound for the _max_ number of nodes in an AVL tree of height $h$, so the max is $2^{h + 1} - 1$ and $n \in O(\log n)$. Thus, we have our $\Theta(\log n)$. 



### Maintaining Balance After Insertion

A **left-heavy** linear AVL tree after insertion will need a **right-rotation** performed on it. Similarly, the inverse for a **right-heavy** tree is a **left-rotation**.

When you have a non-linear tree that might have two different heavy sections, you might need to perform multiple of one or both types of rotations on it to fix the balance.