__CS 240 |__ Jan 8, 2019

# Course Outline

__Textbooks:__

> Algorithms in C++, Robert Sedgewick, 1998
>
> Algorithms Design and Applications, Goodrich & Tamassia, newer edition 

__Assignments:__

Due Wed @ 5:00PM



#Introduction & Asymptotic Analysis

When we first learned to program, we cared mostly about _correctness,_ but starting with this course, we will also be concerned with _efficiency._ We will consider many _abstract data types (ADTs)._ 

The typical operations that store, access, and perform operations on large collections of data are:

- Inserting a data item
- Deleting a data item
- Searching for a data item

### Terminology

A **problem** is defined to be, given a **problem** instance, to carry out a particular computational task. The **problem instance** is a set of data that acts as _input_ for the specified problem, and the **problem solution** is the (correct) _output_ for the specified problem instance. The **size** of a problem instance, $Size(I)$, is a positive integer which is a measure of the size of the instance $I$.

An **algorithm** is a step-by-step process for carrying out a series of computations, given an arbitrary problem instance $I.$ Algorithm $A$ **solves** a problem $\beta$ if, for every instance $I$ of $\beta$, $A$ finds (computes) a _valid_ solution for the instance $I$ in _finite_ time.

A **program** is an _implementation_ of an algorithm using a specified computer language (not focused as much on this in this course, mostly on algorithms).

### Algorithm Creation Process

A problem $\beta$ may have several algorithms, and an algorithm $A$ solving $\beta$ can have several programs. The process for creating one given a problem $\beta$ is as follows:

1. __Algorithm Design: __Design algorithm A that solves $\beta$ 
2. __Algorithm Analysis:__ Assess _correctedness_ and _efficiency_ of $A$ 
   - In this course, efficiency is primarily measured using **runtime** - the amount of time a program takes to run - and **space** - the amount of memory a program uses.
3. Implement the algorithm if above analysis gives satisfactory or good results



#Runtime Analysis

To analyze runtime, we can run an **experimental study** - we write a program implementing the algorithm, and run the program with inputs of _varying size_ and _composition_ (data types). 

However, an experimental study has many _downsides:_

- Implementation of the algorithm may be complicated/costly, implementation can differ
- Runtime is affected by many factors (_hardware, software environment, human factors_)
- Hard to test all inputs (must choose _sample inputs_ very carefully, which is time consuming)

So, we want a framework that does not require us to implement the algorithm and can alleviate the downsides of experimental studies. This is done using an __idealized computer model__ with the implementation of the algorithm done in __pseudocode__, with the time efficiency of the algorithm measured in terms of something known as a _growth rate._

The **growth rate** for an algorithm is an implementation-agnostic measure that only takes into account the program input, but no other factors that may change like those above. It is also known as the __complexity__ of the program.

Instead of time, we count the number of __primitive operations__ in our pseudocode implementation and assume all of these operations take the _same amount of time._ 



### Random Access Machine (RAM) Model

This is an _idealized_ computer model which has a set of _memory cells,_ each of which stores one item of data. Any memory location access or primitive operation takes the same _constant_ amount of time. 

This allows us to compute __running time__ as the number of memory accesses plus number of primitive operations.



### Runtime Simplications

There are a number of simplifications that we can do to make our analysis more accurate and less reliant on the factors described in the downsides:

1. Simplify Comparisons: Compare $100n$ with $100n^2$, or $100000000n + 2000000000$ with $0.01n^2$
   - __Order Notation__, where we _ignore constants and lower order terms,_ is used for this
   - We consider the algorithm's behaviour for large input size to simplify further
