__MATH 239 |__ Oct 24, 2018

# Trees

A connected graph with no cycles is a __tree.__

> Paths are trees, since they contain no cycles. They are also bipartite.

If we delete an edge from a tree, we end up with a graph with two __tree components.__

---

__Side Lemma!__
==Let $G$ be a connected graph and let $e$ be an edge of $G$. Then the graph $G-e$ obtained by deleting $e$ has _at most two components._==

If you remove an edge that connects two nodes with another path between them, then the number of components stay at 1. If you remove an edge that connects two nodes _without_ another path between them, you've just split the graph up into two components.

Formally, let $u, v$ be two vertices of $G$ incident with $e$. For every vertex $w$ of $G$, let $P_w$ be a $wu$-path in $G$. Let $U = \{w \ | \ \forall \ P_w, v \not\in P_w \}$ (vertices where all their paths to $u$ do not contain $v$) and $V = \{w \ | \ \exists \ P_w, v \not\in P_w \}$ (vertices where there exists a path between said vertex to $u$ without going through $v$). Since $G$ is connected, $V(G) = U \cup V$.

Any two vertices of $U$ are in the same component of $G - e$ with $u$, and any two vertices of $V$ are in the same component of $G - e$ with $v$.

This shows that $G - e$ has at most two components. There are two components _iff_ $U$ and $V$ are in different components of $G - e$.

---

### Bridges

If $G$ is a connected graph, a __bridge__ of $G$ is an edge $e$ of $G$ such that $G - e$ is not connected.

==__Theorem^1^:__ An edge $e$ of a connected graph $G$ is not a bridge of $G$ _iff_ there is a cycle in $G$ containing $e$.==

---

__Proof of Theorem^1^__
_Backwards:_ Let $u, v$ be the ends of $e$. Let $C$ be a cycle in $G$ containing $e$. Then $C - e$ is a $uv$-path in $G - e$, showing $u, v$ are in the same component of $G - e$. Our earlier fonsiderations show us that $G - e$ is connected.

_Forwards:_ If $e$ is not a bridge of $G$, then $G - e$ is connected. In particular, there exists a $uv$-path $P$ in $G - e$ $P + e$ is a cycle. 

_QED._

---

==__Corollary^1^__: Every edge of a tree is a bridge. The only tree with no bridge is $\bullet$, a tree of 1 element.==

==__Theorem^2^__: Let $T$ be a tree with $n \geq 1$ vertices. Then, $|E(T)| = n - 1$.==

---

__Proof of Theorem^2^ by Induction__
_Base Case: $n = 1$_
In this case, $|E(T)| =  0$.

For the induction step, $n \geq 2$, and $T$ has at least 1 edge $e$. Because $e$ is a bridge, $T - e$ has two components $T_1, T_2$ are both trees (they are connected anf have no cycles).

We know:
$|V(T_1)| + |V(T_2)| = |V(T)|$, so $ |V(T_1)| < |V(T)|$ and $|V(T_2)| < |V(T)|$, and $|E(T_1)| + |E(T_2)| = |E(T)| - 1$.

The induction implies $|E(T_1)| = |V(T_1)| - 1$ and $|E(T_2)| = |V(T_2)| - 1$.
$|E(T)| - 1 = |E(T_1)| + |E(T_2)| = (|V(T_1)| - 1) + (|V(T_2)| - 1)$
$\ \ \ \ \  \ \ \ \ \ \ \  \ \ \ \ \ \ = |V(T)| - 2$, so
$|E(T)| = |V(T)| - 1$, as required.

---

==__Corollary:__ IF $u$ and $v$ are vertices in a tree $T$, then there is a unique $uv$-path in $T$.==

