__MATH 239 |__ Oct 29, 2018

# Trees (cont. cont.)

Last Time:

- Every tree with $\geq 2$ vertices has at least two vertices of degree 1
- Every edge of a tree is a bridge.

---

Let $T$ be a tree and $u$ a vertex of $T$ with degree 1.
Let $e$ be the edge of $T$ incident with $u$.
What is $T - e$?

Since the edge $e$ is a bridge between the rest of $T$ and $u$, the tree is split into 2 components: a smaller tree and the isolated vertex $u$. We can think of the smaller tree as $T - u$, a tree with one fewer vertex and one fewer edge than $T$.

---

> A vertex with degree 1 in a tree is often called a __leaf__.

==__Theorem^1^:__ Every tree is bipartite.==

---

__Proof of Theorem^1^ (by Induction)__
_Base Case:_ Let $k$ be the number of vertices. If $k = 1$, the tree is the graph $\bullet$, which is bipartite since it has no edges.

_Inductive Hypothesis:_ Suppose this statement is true for trees with $k$ vertices.

_Inductive Conclusion:_ We prove this statement is true for trees with $k + 1$ vertices.

Let $T$ be a tree with $k + 1$ vertices, and let $u$ be a vertex of $T$ with degree 1 (we know such a vertex exists for all trees with $\geq 2$ vertices, from Oct 26). 
Since $T - u$ has $k$ vertices, by the $IH$, we know that $T - u$ has a partition of its vertex set into $X$ and $Y$ such that every edge of $T - u$ has one end in $X$ and one end in $Y$. 
Let $v$ be the other end of the edge of $T$ that is incident with $u$ (the vertex that $u$ connects to in $T - u$). Then, $v \in X$ or $v \in Y$, and adding $u$ to the set that does not contain $v$ yields a bipartition of $T$. 

This proves that a tree $T$ with $k + 1$ vertices is bipartite, as required.

---

==__Theorem^2^:__ Let $G$ be a graph. If any 2 of the following 3 statements hold, then $G$ is a tree:==

1. ==$G$ is connected.==
2. ==$|E(G)| = |V(G)| - 1$==
3. ==$G$ has no cycles.==

---

__Proof of Theorem^2^__

- _1. and 3._ make up the definition of a tree.

- _2. and 3._
  Suppose $G$ has components $C_1, ..., C_r$. Each $C_i$ is a connected graph with no cycles, and so is a tree. Therefore, $|E(C_i)| = |V(C_i)| - 1$, and $|E(G)| = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^r |E(C_i) = \sum\limits^r_{i = 1} (|V(G)| - 1) = \sum\limits^r_{i = 1} |V(C_i)| - r = |V(G) |- r$. Since $2.$ says $|E(G)| = |V(G)| - 1$, then $r = 1$. Thus, $G$ is connected and we have proven $1.$, and since $1.$ and $3.$ is true, then by the definition of a tree, $G$ is a tree.

- _1. and 2._
  Our claim is that $G$ is connected $\rightarrow$ $G$ contains a subgraph of $T$ that is a tree and $|V(T)| = |V(G)|$.
  We induct on the number $n$ of cycles in $G$. 

  If $n = 0$, then $G$ is a tree. 

  If $n > 0$, then let $C$ be a cycle in $G$ and let $e \in E(C)$. Then $G - e$ is connected since $e$ is not a bridge of $G$, but has fewer cycles than $G$ has. By continuing to remove edges that are in a cycle of $G$ but keeping $G$ connected, this induction yields a subgraph $T$ of $G - e$ that is a tree with $V(T) = V(G - e)$. Then $T$ is a subgraph of $G$ that is a tree with $V(T) = V(G)$.

  By this claim, $G$ has a subgraph of $T$ that is a tree and $V(T) = V(G)$.
  Thus, $|E(T)| = |V(T)| - 1 = |V(G)| - 1 = |E(G)|$, thus $|E(T)|= |E(G)|$ and $G = T$, so $G$ is a tree!

---

